Quantitative Forecasting

"Forecasting is the process of making predictions of the future based
on past and present data and most commonly by analysis of trends. A
commonplace example might be estimation of some variable of interest at
some specified future date."
– Wikipedia (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forecasting)

Why forecasting?

@groundhog.jpg

Many things effective altruism is interested in take place in the future:
• Results of studies
• New technologies (clean meat, artificial intelligence, genetic engineering)
• Global risks (from biotechnology, artificial intelligence)

Knowing about the extent & frequency of these events is useful

Why quantitative?

• Big difference between 1% and 0.00001% (especially with existenial risks!)
• Can be useful in expected value calculations
• This is effective altruism

Central concepts

Probabilistic beliefs

#I used to think like:
#Either X will happen
#or it won't happen
#or it could happen

It is possible & useful to assign probabilities to some beliefs,
as opposed to believing that X definitely will/won't happen.

Calibration

Example:
• I make 10 forecasts about the occurrence of radioactive rain in the next days
• For each day, I assign 60% probability to "There will be radioactive rain"
• I'm calibrated if there is radioactive rain on 6 of these days

@kraken.jpg

Underconfidence

• Not believing your beliefs enough
• If there is radioactive rain on 8 of these days, I'm underconfident
• People usually aren't underconfident (in forecasting)

Overconfidence

• Believing your beliefs too much
• If there is radioactive rain on 3 of the next 10 days, I'm overconfident
• Nearly everyone is overconfident

You're calibrated if n% of your n% forecasts come true.

Resolution

Willingness to make "daring" predictions (near 0% or 100%).
Predicting always 50% will be calibrated, but with low resolution.

Brier score

@brier.png

• Score to determine the accuracy of a set of forecasts
• 0 is perfect, 0.5 is completely random, 1 is also perfect (but reversed)
• Good forecasters achieve scores from ~0.1 to ~0.2

Useful techniques in forecasting

Base Rates

The base rate of an event is the incidence of this kind
of event happening in the past.

Example:
There was radioactive rain on 20% of the days in the last year.
Then 20% seems like a good first estimate for radioactive rain
tomorrow.

Wisdown of the Crowds/Dialectical Bootstrapping

Wisdown of the crowds: Take the estimates of multiple people, use the mean.
Dialectical bootstrapping: Make multiple different own estimates, use the mean.

Extremising

When the estimates of different people point in the same direction,
become more confident.

Example:
7 people independently agree that the probability of radioactive rain
tomorrow is 65%. They all have different information, so we can become
more confident.
